---
  title: Programming Languages
  created_at: "2012-03-30"
---

The figure below shows the relative percent of programming language usage in 
the bioinformatics community according to the 2012 survey. Languages with a 
total frequency less than 5 have been excluded for clarity. This figure shows 
the three most popular programming languages in bioinformatics are dynamic 
scripting languages: R, Python and Perl. Perl was the most popular language in 
the 2008 survey however R, a functional language aimed at statistics, is now 
the most popular in 2012. This highlights the importance of data analysis and 
hypothesis testing in bioinformatics.

<%= image amzn('results/language/total.png') %>

The following figure compares the relative percentage point (pp) change in 
programming language usage between the 2012 and 2008 surveys. Languages with 
less than 2 pp change have been excluded for clarity. It should be noted that 
the question concerning programming languages usage in the two surveys differed 
slightly.

<%= image amzn('results/language/change.png') %>

This figure shows a strong increase in Python usage, possibly at the expense of 
Java and Perl. Shell scripting is also on the increase which may suggest more 
bioinformaticians are becoming familiar with Unix and the command line. The 
increase JavaScript and PHP also suggests a trend for increasing web-based 
development in bioinformatics.

This figure is based on only two collection points, 2008 \& 2012, but does 
indicate downward trajectories for Java and Perl usage. Perl still however shows 
a large presence in the community so many be expected to be used for more years 
to come. If trend for Java continues however it may be expected that overall 
usage may be less than 10% by 2012. Python on the other hand may be expected to 
continue to grow become the dominant language of bioinformatics.
